+++
title = "Body size shifts and early warning signals precede the historic collapse of whale stocks"
date = "2017-01-01"
authors = ["Clements, C.F.","Blanchard, J.L.","Nash, K.L.","Hindell, M.A. & Ozgul, A."]
publication_types = ["2"]
publication = "_Nature Ecology and Evolution_"
publication_short = ""

abstract = "Predicting population declines is a key challenge in the face of global environmental change. Abundance-based early warning signals have been shown to precede population collapses; however, such signals are sensitive to the low reliability of abundance estimates. Here, using historical data on whales harvested during the 20th century, we demonstrate that early warning signals can be present not only in the abundance data, but also in the more reliable body size data of wild populations. We show that during the period of commercial whaling, the mean body size of caught whales declined dramatically (by up to 4 m over a 70-year period), leading to early warning signals being detectable up to 40 years before the global collapse of whale stocks. Combining abundance and body size data can reduce the length of the time series required to predict collapse, and decrease the chances of false positive early warning signals.Non-linear changes in the dynamics of complex ecological systems are often preceded by predictable changes in statistical properties of their time series. Changes in metrics such as autocorrelation of an abundance time series form the basis of generic early warning signals theory, and suggest that regime shifts to alternative stable states, as well as population collapses that do not pass through catastrophic bifurcations, may be predicted well in advance of their occurrence. However, although the theory underpinning this phenomenon is well understood, and such signals have been demonstrated in simulation and laboratory experiments, the possibility to detect and respond to early warning signals in real-world populations remains unclear. This could be due to the reliability of such signals being highly dependent on the quality of the data analysed, with sampling protocols serving either to muffle or magnify statistical signals6, or widely available proxies of abundance not necessarily reflecting underlying population dynamics. These difficulties may be circumvented by analysing not only the time series of a population’s abundance—as has been done classically—but also the concurrent change in fitness-related phenotypic traits such as body size. Ecological (that is, plastic) and evolutionary (that is, selection) responses to environmental perturbations can alter size distributions. Body size shifts affect population stability through changes in key demographic rates, including survival, growth and reproduction. Consequently, changes in size distribution may affect the resilience of populations, potentially leading to regime shifts or population collapse. In exploited systems, size-selective fishing has been shown to alter size distributions and increase variability in abundance due to reductions in the size structure of fish stocks, with the a priori expectation being that selective fishing decreases the variance of size distributions. Thus, tracking shifts in body size alongside changes in the statistical properties of an abundance time series can provide two concurrent indicators of stability. While this potentially powerful approach has been demonstrated in experimental microcosms, it has yet to be evaluated for real-world collapses. Although examples of overexploitation are widespread, few are as stark as the collapse of global whale stocks during the 20th century. Commercial whaling flourished during the 1700s and 1800s as the slow-moving northern and southern right whale populations were harvested to the brink of extinction. Technological advancements in the early 20th century opened up new whaling opportunities and the largely unchecked exploitation of global whale stocks. While other exogenous factors—such as human-driven alterations to the food webs on which whales depend16, or increasing pollution (both chemical and aural)—cannot be exonerated from affecting the stability of whale populations, it is widely agreed that the main pressure exerted on this system was commercial whaling. This overharvesting of whales led to the sequential collapse of populations as whalers moved from one species to another to maintain commercial viability. The International Whaling Commission (IWC) has collated exceptional global records of 20th century commercial whaling, detailing the number of almost all and the size of most whales legally caught since 1900. These records provide the opportunity to test, for the first time, whether early warning signals are present before collapses of global whale stocks, and whether the inclusion of body size improves the reliability of any detected early warning signals."

image_preview = ""
selected = false
projects = ["fishaqua", "tools"]
#tags = ["sustainability"]
url_custom = [{name = "HTML", url = "https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0188"}]
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
+++


