---
title: 'Research Design' 
linktitle: 'Chapter 6: Research Design'
toc: true
type: docs
date: "2019-06-05T00:00:00-07:00"
draft: false
menu:
  302:
    weight: 60
    parent: "mA"
    identifier: "ch6"
    name: "Chapter 6: Research Design"


# Prev/next pager order (if `docs_section_pager` enabled in `params.toml`)
weight: 60
---




# Learning Objectives for *Research Design*

These are the learning objectives for this portion of the class:

1. Describe reliability in terms of true scores and error
1. Compute reliability from the true score and error variance
1. Define the standard error of measurement and state why it is valuable
1. State the effect of test length on reliability
1. Distinguish between reliability and validity
1. Define three types of validity
1. Recognize sampling bias
1. Distinguish among self-selection bias, undercoverage bias, and survivorship bias
1. Distinguish between between-subject and within-subject designs
1. Define "multi-factor design" and "factorial design"
1. Identify the levels of a variable in an experimental design
1. Explain how experimentation allows causal inferences
1. Explain the role of unmeasured variables
1. Explain how causation can be inferred in non-experimental designs

# Consumables

Each week there will be a number of items for you to consume, be it reading, watching, listening, or a combination thereof.

- [Online Statistics Textbook, Chapter 6](http://onlinestatbook.com/2/research_design/contents.html)
    - [PDF of the chapter](http://onlinestatbook.com/2/research_design/research_design.pdf)

# Assignments

Your assignments for this week are as follows:

## Quiz

Don't forget about your chapter quiz! Find it in the Quizzes menu in D2L.

## Chapter Questions

Pick [a question from OST Chapter 6's Exercises section](http://onlinestatbook.com/2/research_design/exercises.html) that one one else has selected yet and post how you solved it.

- 2 pts per each chapter’s Slack channel (initial post AND response)
- no partial credit for initial post only or response only

### Steps to completion

1. Choose [a question from the end of the chapter in the section called "Exercises" to answer](http://onlinestatbook.com/2/graphing_distributions/ch2_exercises.html).  Post the question and your answer, and make sure to justify your response.

 For example, if you determine that a type of statistic is descriptive, provide your reasoning being specific about the problem presented and your answer.

1. Next, respond to another students' answers by asking a question for clarification, providing a personal experience, posting a thought-provoking question, taking a controversial, but professional stand, adding something new to the conversation, quoting another student's comment and add an additional idea based on this comment, etc.

 Your responses should be respectful and offered in a professional manner. You may wish to review the [behavior Course Policies]({{< relref "101-syllabus.markdown" >}}) to help frame your response. Remember, you will be responding about the specific idea, issue, or question.


*You may not answer a question that has been previously addressed.*
