+++
title = "FastqCleaner: an Interactive Bioconductor application for quality-control, filtering and trimming of FASTQ files"
date = 2018-06-28
draft = false
authors = ["Leandro G Roser", "@fernan", "Daniel O Sánchez"]
publication = "BMC Bioinformatics 20: 361"
publication_short = "BMC Bioinformatics 20: 361"
publication_types = ["2"]
doi = "10.1186/s12859-019-2961-8"

# Tags and categories
# For example, use `tags = []` for no tags, or the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["genomics", "R", "bioconductor", "FastQ", ]
categories = []

# Preprint
url_preprint = "https://doi.org/10.1101/393140"

# Code
url_code = "https://github.com/leandroroser/FastqCleaner"

# PDF
url_pdf = "https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/track/pdf/10.1186/s12859-019-2961-8"

# abstract

##abstract = "Background
#Exploration and processing of FASTQ files are the first steps in
#state-of-the-art data analysis workflows of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
#platforms. The large amount of data generated by these technologies has put
#a challenge in terms of rapid analysis and visualization of sequencing
#information. Recent integration of the R data analysis platform with web
#visual frameworks has stimulated the development of user-friendly, powerful,
#and dynamic NGS data analysis applications.
#
#Results
#This paper presents FastqCleaner, a Bioconductor visual application for both
#quality-control (QC) and pre-processing of FASTQ files. The interface shows
#diagnostic information for the input and output data and allows to select a
#series of filtering and trimming operations in an interactive framework.
#FastqCleaner combines the technology of Bioconductor for NGS data analysis
#with the data visualization advantages of a web environment.
#
#Conclusions
#FastqCleaner is an user-friendly, offline-capable tool that enables access
#to advanced Bioconductor infrastructure. The novel concept of a Bioconductor
#interactive application that can be used without the need for programming
#skills, makes FastqCleaner a valuable resource for NGS data analysis."


# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder. 
[image]
  # Caption (optional)
  caption = "Typical workflow with FastqCleaner"

  # Focal point (optional)
  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point = "BottomRight"
+++

Preprint was available at BioRxiv, https://doi.org/10.1101/393140 

